millions of years ago there were seas
and oceans
where deserts are today what if it all
comes back
water instead of sand where deserts used
to be
life on the planet would change
completely
sand can act like a liquid if a strong
enough airflow makes it rise from below
the air reduces friction between sand
particles making more space
the particles begin to move freely as if
they're in a liquid
if a huge vent suddenly opened under the
earth's crust
blowing air from beneath then perhaps
the entire landscape would begin to sink
like being in quicksand such monuments
as the egyptian pyramids or the sphinx
would sink
under the ground huge cities built on
sand would disappear
the sahara desert would resemble one
bubbling cauldron
camel caravans would simply fall down
but don't worry
the animals wouldn't get hurt liquid
sand is filled with oxygen
so they'd be able to swim in it
but what if sand turned into water
instead of just a liquid version of
itself
if this happened quickly and
unexpectedly then disasters would occur
on
all the beaches of the world imagine
you're sunbathing on an air mattress
on a sandy beach of a seaside resort
you're wearing sunglasses
the sea waves are tickling your heels
gulls are squawking overhead
and you have iced tea in your hands a
perfect holiday
but then you feel your mattress moving a
wave hits you
you take off your glasses and find
yourself in the middle of the sea
the entire beach has turned into water
it reaches way
up to the road where cars drive and
houses stand
you help people who were sunbathing
nearby to climb on the mattress
you swim to the new shore head home turn
on the tv
and see this is happening all over the
world
hundreds of thousands of beaches are
flooded water overflows city streets and
houses
people are scared some leave their homes
while
others take surfboards and ride the
waves and while part of the world is
trying to cope with a global flood of
sandy shores
a fifth ocean is being formed at the
same time
you get on a plane and fly over the
largest sandy desert on the planet
the area of the sahara desert is 3.5
million square miles
this is almost the area of the entire
usa
billions of tons of sand turned into
water in an instant
and all this water starts to spill over
animals living in the sand such as
jerboa scorpions cobras
and many others disappear from the face
of the planet
the nearest countries are devastated by
the flood
the new ocean connects to the
mediterranean red
and terrenian seas the water level in
the world's oceans
is rising so much that most island
countries
have to evacuate to continents
in coastal cities people sit in cafes
and enjoy life
some are sunbathing while others try to
escape from the heat and the shade
suddenly the wind rises and a shadow
appears on the ground
people look at it puzzled and it keeps
growing
everyone looks up and sees that a huge
tsunami is approaching the shore
desert countries have it even worse
they're flooded at once
and turn into many small divided islands
and huge waves will hit the shores of
port towns for a long time
the hottest places on the planet have
become wet
hot sands turned into almost boiling
water
it quickly evaporates and forms huge
rain clouds
thanks to high humidity the air pressure
changes and strong winds begin to blow
they drive clouds all over the planet
long reigns begin
all over the world drenching everything
water mixes with the world's oceans and
cools down
the hottest places in the world are
getting colder with temperatures
changing
tornadoes and hurricanes form in
different parts of the world
and ravage the planet the face of the
whole earth is warping
new seas lakes and rivers form all over
the world
before water comprised 70 percent of the
planet's surface now
it's 90 percent
fortunately cataclysms don't last long
even though sands cover a lot of land
they're not very thick
the depth of the ocean is hundreds of
times deeper than the depth of sand in a
desert
in some the sand is only a few inches
thick
only the largest dunes may reach 150
feet in thickness
the water levels will rise drastically
and will probably never return to what
they used to be
but at least the weather will calm down
sooner or later
but something bad is still going to
happen
every year 2 billion tons of dust rise
into the air
most of it comes from deserts particles
of this dust contain useful elements and
bacteria
the wind carries them all over the
planet a quarter of this dust comes to
rest in seas and oceans
bacteria and nutrients feed small
creatures in the ocean
such as phytoplankton or krill these
creatures in their turn
are food for small fish and even whales
and the fish are food for predators
as well as for many land animals so if
sands turn into water
the ocean will lose a lot of its
nutrients
the good news is that it won't last long
either
nutrients and bacteria will adapt to the
new conditions
and will be able to evaporate with water
which condenses into rain clouds
the largest variety of the marine world
lives in shallow waters
not far from the coast the desert turned
into water gives ideal conditions
for new life to develop new species of
animals appear
that can survive in hot water many
creatures that lived in hot sands
have now adapted to marine life camels
have learned to swim
and small reptiles can hold their breath
underwater for a long time
thanks to hot weather and shallowness a
huge amount of seaweed grows on the
bottom
that can withstand high temperatures the
new ocean
now resembles a multi-colored garden of
marine plants
people are also trying to adapt they
build towns on massive wooden structures
right on the water and attach them to
the bottom with long
chains fishing has become the main
source of food for all humankind
cars have become obsolete everyone wants
boats
famous expensive car brands now design
luxury yachts and ships
also everyone learns to swim and every
resident of sea cities
is an excellent swimmer all the new
water was fresh
until it mixed with the sea and gained
its saltiness
people have created special filters that
turn this water fresh
global stocks are increasing there are
almost no places left in the world where
people don't have enough water
but what if our situation became
stranger still
and all the sand on the planet not only
on beaches and in deserts
turned into liquid all hourglasses in
the world would accelerate
because the water flows much faster than
sand sand is also used for all types of
construction works
they use it in the production of
concrete and to lay a strong foundation
it would be impossible to create bricks
and clay without sand
almost all houses not counting wooden
ones would simply
fall apart but wooden houses could just
rot
because of the high humidity levels sand
is used for glass
production of mirrors windows and light
bulbs would be greatly reduced
world reserves of drinking water would
decrease as sand is a natural filter for
purification
there would be huge traffic jams on the
roads because
well there would be no roads to speak of
imagine you're driving a car
and its wheels turn into jelly road
vehicles would be severely affected
planes would also stop flying because
sand is used in the construction of the
runway
the only means of transportation left
would be ships
sand is present almost everywhere on our
planet so the water would begin to
moisten
and wash away the soil the whole world
would turn into a vicious marsh
and it would be very difficult to move
around the humidity levels would
increase significantly
and thick fogs would appear every day
a huge number of scala pendras
salamanders frogs
and other creatures that love humidity
would take over the planet
some insects may evolve and increase in
size thanks to the new ideal conditions
and people if they survive at all might
grow
scales to better transfer moisture
the earth would look like a planet from
a sci-fi movie
but fortunately this isn't going to ever
happen